What is Socialism, anyway?
==========================

Socialism is what society looks like when the value of *equality* is taken seriously — when every human being is accorded equal worth in all areas of life, not just in their capacity as a worker or a consumer or a voter.

The goal of socialism is to ensure that everyone’s basic needs are met, so that nobody has undue power over anyone else, and everyone has the freedom and the ability to live a decent and dignified life.

Socialism is “radical democracy”: democratic control of society and the economy.

We have formal democracy — voting, representation, etc. — but socialism makes this democracy more substantial by:
- Expanding democratic voice in society beyond electoral politics
- Giving the people direct control of economic matters
- Strengthening political democracy by eliminating the influence of money


What about freedom? Isn’t a capitalist society synonymous with a free society?

We believe that socialism is the way to maximize freedom for everyone, not just the rich.

(This is the master key to this whole exercise; if you find yourself losing your grasp of one of these arguments in the moment, just remember that freedom for all is our primary concern, and you’ll be on the right track.)

Freedom to buy and sell things without government interference may be the capitalist definition of freedom, but it’s only one small freedom among many. Under capitalism there’s no freedom in the workplace — a capitalist boss is an unelected dictator, with powers over you that we would never grant to a democratic government. And there’s no freedom from the workplace — think of the things you don’t do because your need to pay the bills (or keep your health care) traps you in a condition of dependency.

The inequalities of wealth and income under capitalism mean the rich have more options — they have access to schools, careers, homes, hobbies, and even consumer goods that the rest of us do not. (Money is freedom, in this very real sense.) And in capitalist democracy the rich have more political power, which makes it even easier for them to reserve for themselves legal freedoms that the rest of us don’t enjoy.

Basically, there’s much more to freedom than an absence of restrictions on voluntary exchange. The greatest trick libertarians ever pulled was convincing you that their definition of freedom is all there is.
