Isn’t socialism inherently undemocratic?
========================================

Our position, in a nutshell: no socialism without democracy; no democracy without socialism.

Our organization’s name is Democratic Socialists for a reason — those words carry equal weight, and there’s nothing intrinsic to socialism that is necessarily counter to democracy.

In fact we see socialism as the path to true, substantive democracy, a democracy that’s more free, fair, and equal than the one we have in the United States today.
• Democratic control of society every day, not just on Election Day
• Democratic control of the workplace
• Equality that goes beyond “one person, one vote”

Socialist (and so-called socialist) governments have turned authoritarian in the past, especially in the chaos that follows a violent revolution, but this is a temptation for governments of all kinds — there’s always much more to these stories than a simple progression from socialism to authoritarianism.

In fact, socialistic governments and policies in stable, developed countries have enhanced democracy by making societies more equitable and fairer. Examples include the welfare states of Scandinavia and Western Europe — and even, to some extent, the United States — from 1945–1975.

Often, this question is really asking about the transition from private property to collective or nationalized property, and how a democratic society can nationalize firms and industries against their owners’ will. The answer is that during a democratic transition to socialism, owners would be compensated for the fair value of the assets — and that a truly democratic government would necessarily be undertaking these actions on behalf of a majority of society.
