Why are socialists concerned with class above all else?
=======================================================

Socialists emphasize **equality** above all else. It just so happens that class is one of the dimensions in which our society is most unequal — and economic/class inequality influences and sustains other inequalities, such as racial, gender, and other hierarchies.

As  socialists, we believe that the capitalist system is either the prime cause or an exacerbating factor in many of our society’s unjust inequalities, and we believe we know how to replace this system with something more fair and equitable. And we believe that racism and other forms of oppression exist independently of economic concerns, but it is the material power of the oppressors that gives their views effective force in the world, and enables them to make the move from discrimination to oppression.

However, to the extent that other forms of inequality and domination are not class-based or economic in nature, we do not view those forms of oppression as secondary in urgency — they should be fought as well, on their own terms.

And while gender or racial categories fragment the populace into minority groups, class solidarity can be a force for unity. It is as workers that we all experience oppression — and it is as workers that we have the power, and the strength in numbers, to change the world. A democratic movement depends on numbers, on unifying as much of the public as possible.  Racial and other divisions have historically been used to weaken class solidarity and distract the working class from their ultimate oppressors, the capitalist class.